# ChrysaLisp

ChrysaLisp is built from functions. Ok, so that's just about the most obvious
thing to say about any computer program but they are organised in a slightly
different way than other systems.

They are not bound into larger groupings such as libraries. More often than not
ChrysaLisp functions are collected into classes. Classes implement a general
concept and the methods of that class are individual related but unbound
functions.

All external function calling goes via indirect calls through the local
function Vtable. Local subroutines use standard relative call instructions.

Even a class Vtable is implemented as a function that has no code but just a
local Vtable !

## Function format

Functions consist of 5 sections, header, code, string pool, external function
Vtable and external function path string pool. In some circumstances these
sections may not be present, for example in the case of a class Vtable the code
section is empty, plus a string pool or table section may be empty if there are
no entries required. When a function is in bound format sections such as the
path string pool may have been stripped after binding in order to save memory
space.

The total size of a function and the start of the code and path Vtable sections
are aligned to a ptr_size.

### Header fields

* ulong/ptr ln_fnode: In a bound function the address of the next function in
the function list. When unbound -1.

* ushort fn_header_length: Total length of the function in bytes.

* ushort fn_header_entry: Offset in bytes to the code entry point.

* ushort fn_header_links: Offset in bytes to the external function Vtable.
Vtable entries are ptr_size. In unbound format they are relative offsets to
entries in the path pool. In bound format they are pointers to the code section
of the external functions.

* ushort fn_header_paths: Offset in bytes to the path string pool. 0 terminated
C style strings.

* ushort fn_header_stack: Stack amount in bytes required by function. Currently
this is a default value for all unless specified as an optional argument via
def-func. A process main function uses this value to allocate the initial stack
requirement but in future a debug mode stack check will check at each function
entry point that there is enough stack remaining for the function invocation.

* offset fn_header_pathname: The actual pathname of the function. 0 terminated
C style string, followed by padding bytes, of at least a single byte, of the
offset from the code section to the string start.

## Low level Vtable, string, and calling/jumping

You do not normally need to use these low level features, but higher level
calling and binding operations do. These are the Lisp functions that create
entries in the local Vtable, add strings to the local string pool etc. They
de-duplicate and in special situations allow duplication where that is
essential to create a class Vtable correctly.

### fn-add-string

Add a string to the string pool, if not already present, and return its unique
index value.

### fn-add-path

Add an external function path to the path pool, if not already present, and
return its unique index.

### fn-add-link

Push an entry onto the Vtable, referring to a path added using fn-add-path.

### fn-find-link

Search the current Vtable for a path and add a new entry if needed using
fn-add-link. Return the unique index.

### fn-string

Load register with string address via the local string pool.

### fn-bind

Load register with external function address via the local Vtable.

### fn-call

Call external function address indirectly via the local Vtable.

### fn-jmp

Jump to external function address indirectly via the local Vtable.

## Higher level function calling

### f-call

Call method statically.

### f-jmp

Jump to method statically.

### f-bind

Bind to method statically.

### s-call

Super call method statically.

### s-jmp

Super jump to method statically.

### s-bind

Super bind to method statically.

### v-call

Virtual call method.

### v-jmp

Virtual jump to method.

### v-bind

Virtual bind to method.

### d-call

De-Virtualise call method.

### d-jmp

De-Virtualise jump to method.

### d-bind

De-Virtualise bind to method.

### r-call

Register dispatched call method.

### l-call

Local subroutine call.

## Function info helpers

### f-path

Return method function path.

### s-path

Return super method function path.

## Function entry and exit helpers

### f-entry

Method entry args.

### f-exit

Method exit args.

### l-entry

Local subroutine entry args.

### l-exit

Local subroutine exit args.
